[Chapter] 8: An Analysis of the Product (Karma) and the Producer (Karaka) (action and agent)1. A real producer does not p
roduce a real product.Even more so, a non-real producer does not seek a non-real product.

2. There is no producing action of a real thing; [if so,] there would be a product without someone producing.Also, there 
is no producing by a real thing; [if so,] there would be someone producing without something produced.

3. If a non-existent producer would produce a non-real product,The product would be without a causal source and the produ
cer would be without a causal source.

4. If there is no causal source, there is nothing to be produced nor cause-in-general (karana).Then neither do the produc
ing action, the person producing, nor the instrument of production (karana) exist.

5. If the producing action, etc. do not exist, then neither can the true reality (dharma) nor false reality (adharma) exi
st.If neither the true reality nor the false reality exists, then also the product (phala) born from that does not exist
.

6. If there is no real product, then there also exists no path to heaven nor to ultimate release.Thus it logically follow
s that all producing actions are without purpose.

7. And a real-nonreal producer does not produce in a real-nonreal manner.For, indeed, how can “real” and “non-real,” whic
h are mutually contradictory, occur in one place?

8. A real producer (kartra) does not produce what is non-real, and a non-real producer does not produce what is real.[Fro
m that] indeed, all the mistakes must logically follow.

9. The producer, who is neither real nor non-real, does not produce a product which is either real or non-real,Because of
the reasons which have been advanced earlier.

10. The non-real producer does not produce a product which is not real, nor both real-and-non-real,Because of the reasons
which have been advanced earlier.

11. And a real-non-real producer does not produce a product which is neither real nor non-real.This is evident from the r
easons which have been advanced earlier.

12. The producer proceeds being dependent on the product, and the product proceeds being dependent on the producer.The ca
use for realization (i.e. Nirvana) is seen in nothing else.

13. In the same way one should understand the “acquiring” (i.e. of karma – upadana) on the basis of the “giving up,” etc.
of the producer and the product.By means of [this analysis of] the product and the producer all other things should be 
dissolved.

