[Chapter] 5: An Analysis of the “Irreductible Elements” (dhātus) (the elements)1. Space does not exist at all before the 
defining characteristic of space (ākāśalakṣaṇa).If it would exist before the defining characteristic, then one must fals
ely conclude that there would be something without a defining characteristic.

2. In no case has anything existed without a defining characteristic.If an entity without a defining characteristic does 
not exist, to what does the defining characteristic apply?

3. There is no functioning of a defining characteristic in a case where there is [already] a defining characteristic or w
here there is not a defining characteristic.And it can function in nothing except where there is a defining characterist
ic or where there is not a defining characteristic.

4. When there is no related function (saṃpravṛtti) (i.e. defining process), it is not possible to have “that to which a d
efining characteristic applies.”And if “that to which a defining characteristic applies” is not possible, then a definin
g characteristic cannot come into existence.

5. Therefore, “that to which a defining characteristic applies” does not exist (i.e independently); and certainly a defin
ing characteristic itself does not exist (i.e independently).Now, something does not exist without “that to which a defi
ning characteristic applies” and the defining characteristic.

6. If the existing thing (1) (bhāva) does not exist, how then would the non-existing thing (2) (abhāva) come into existen
ce?And who holds: the existing-and-non-existing (3) thing which does not have the properties of an existing-and-non-exis
ting thing (4)?

7. Therefore space is neither an existing thing nor a non-existing thing, neither something to which a defining character
istic applies (i.e. separate from a defining characteristic) nor a defining characteristic. (i.e. the same as a defining
characteristic)Also, the other five irreducible elements can be considered in the same way as space.

8. But those unenlightened people who either affirm reality or non-realityDo not perceive the blessed cessation-of-appear
ance of existing things.

