[Chapter] 24: An Analysis of the Holy Truths (aryasatya) (the noble truths)1. If everything is empty, there is no origina
tion nor destruction.Then you must incorrectly conclude that there is non-existence of the four holy truths.

2. If there is non-existence of the four holy truths, the saving knowledge, the elimination [of illusion],The “becoming” 
[enlightened] (bhavana), and the “realization” [of the goal] are impossible.

3. If there is non-existence, then also the four holy “fruits” do not exist.In the non-existence of fruit there is no “re
siding in fruit” nor obtaining.

4. When the community [of Buddhists] does not exist, then those eight “kinds of persons” [i.e., four abiding in the fruit
and four who are obtaining] do not exist.Because there is non-existence of the four holy truths, the real dharma does n
ot exist.

5. And if there are no dharma and community, how will the Buddha exist?By speaking thus, [that everything is empty] certa
inly you deny the three jewels [i.e., the Buddha, the dharma, and the community].

6. You deny the real existence of a product, of right and wrong,And all the practical behavior of the world as being empt
y.

7. We reply that you do not comprehend the point of emptiness;You eliminate both “emptiness” itself and its purpose from 
it.

8. The teaching by the Buddhas of the dharma has recourse to two truths:The world-ensconced truth (T1) and the truth whic
h is the highest sense (T2).

9. Those who do not know the distribution (vibhagam) of the two kinds of truthDo not know the profound “point” (tattva) (
T3) in the teaching of the Buddha.

10. The highest sense [of the truth] (T2) is not taught apart from practical behavior (T1),And without having understood 
the highest sense (T2) one cannot understand nirvana (T3).

11. Emptiness, having been dimly perceived, utterly destroys the slow-witted.It is like a snake wrongly grasped or [magic
al] knowledge incorrectly applied.

12. Therefore the mind of the ascetic [Guatama] was diverted from teaching the dharma,Having thought about the incomprehe
nsibility of the dharma by the stupid.

13. Time and again you have made a condemnation of emptiness,But that refutation does not apply to our emptiness.

14. When emptiness “works”, then everything in existence “works”. (A)If emptiness “does not work”, then all existence “do
es not work”. (B)

15. You, while projecting your own faults on us, (i.e. objectifying emptiness)Are like a person who, having mounted his h
orse, forgot the horse!(i.e. a tool)

16. If you recognize real existence on account of the self-existence of things,You perceive that there are uncaused and u
nconditioned things.

17. You deny “what is to be produced,” cause, the producer, the instrument of production, and the producing action,And th
e origination, destruction, and “fruit.”

18. The “originating dependently” we call “emptiness”;This apprehension, i.e., taking into account [all other things], is
the understanding of the middle way.

19. Since there is no dharma whatever originating independently,No dharma whatever exists which is not empty.

20. If all existence is not empty, there is neither origination nor destruction.You must wrongly conclude then that the f
our holy truths do not exist.

21. Having originated without being conditioned, how will sorrow (dukkha) come into existence?It is said that sorrow (duk
kha) is not eternal; therefore, certainly it does not exist by its own nature (svabbava).

22. How can that which is existing by its own nature originate again?For him who denies emptiness there is no production.

23. There is no destruction of sorrow (dukkha) if it exists by its own nature.By trying to establish “self-existence” you
deny destruction.

24. If the path [of release] is self-existent, then there is no way of bringing it into existence (bhavana);If that path 
is brought into existence, then “self-existence,” which you claim does not exist.

25. When sorrow (dukkha), origination, and destruction do not exist,What kind of path will obtain the destruction of sorr
ow (dukkha)?

26. If there is no complete knowledge as to self-existence, how [can there be] any knowledge of it?Indeed, is it not true
that self-existence is that which endures?

27. As in the case of complete knowledge, neither destruction, realization, “bringing into existence,”Nor are the four ho
ly fruits possible for you.

28. If you accept “self-existence,” and a “fruit” is not known by its self-existence,How can it be known at all?

29. In the non-existence of “fruit,” there is no “residing in fruit” nor obtaining [the “fruit”];When the community [of B
uddhists] does not exist, then those eight “kinds of persons” do not exist.

30. Because there is non-existence of the four holy truths, the real dharma does not exist.And if there is no dharma and 
community, how will the Buddha exist?

31. For you, either the one who is enlightened (buddha) comes into being independent of enlightenment,Or enlightenment co
mes into being independent of the one who is enlightened.

32. For you, some one who is a non-buddha by his own nature (svabhava) but strives for enlightenment (i.e. a Bodhisattva)
Will not attain the enlightenment though the “way of life of becoming fully enlightened.”

33. Neither the dharma nor non-dharma will be done anywhere.What is produced which is non-empty? Certainly self-existence
is not produced.

34. Certainly, for you, there is a product without [the distinction] of dharma or non-dharma.Since, for you, the product 
caused by dharma or non-dharma does not exist.

35. If, for you, the product is caused by dharma or non-dharma, be non-empty?How can that product, being originated by dh
arma or non-dharma empty?

36. You deny all mundane and customary activitiesWhen you deny emptiness [in the sense of] dependent co-origination (paty
tya-samutpada).

37. If you deny emptiness, there would be action which is unactivated.There would be nothing whatever acted upon, and a p
roducing action would be something not begun.

38. According to [the doctrine of] “self-existence” the world is free from different conditions;Then it will exist as unp
roduced, undestroyed and immutable.

39. If non-emptiness does not exist, then something is attained which is not attained;There is cessation of sorrow (dukkh
a) and actions, and all evil is destroyed.

40. He who perceives dependent co-origination (patytya-samutpada)Also understands sorrow (dukkha), origination, and destr
uction as well as the path [of release].

